# DNA-SaM, a Robust System for Large-Scale Data Storage
## About the project
The explosive growth of global data necessitates the development of new storage media. DNA, with its high data storage density, durability, and capacity, has emerged as a promising alternative. The Suffix Automaton is a fundamental tool in string algorithms and text processing, enabling linear-time construction and support operations like pattern matching and longest common substring queries in optimal time complexities. Here, we present DNA-SaM, a DNA data storage framework that integrates suffix automaton-based sequence optimization for efficient and scalable encoding. 

DNA-SaM consists of three main components: a file segmentation system, DNA encoding pipeline and DNA decoding pipeline. The encoding pipeline includes sequence optimization using a Suffix Automaton and the incorporation of error correction.

## System overview
**File segmentation:** Divides files with large data volumes before encoding (for example, a PB-scale file is segmented into 1024 TB, each TB is segmented into 1024 GB, each GB is further divided into 1024 MB). An address strand encodes hierarchical indices (PB, TB, GB, MB) for data reconstruction. 

**Encoding:** Converts data into DNA sequences through direct mapping based on a predefined codebook, where each 15-bit binary unit corresponds to an 8-nt DNA sequence.

**Sequencing optimization:** Searches out and replaces forbidden sequences using classic Suffix Automaton in linear time complexity.

**Error correction:** Adds error-correcting codes to the optimized sequences. 

This system achieves a logical scalability to PB-scale storage with linear time complexity, while maintaining favorable attributes for DNA data storage (density: 1.88 bit/nt, controlled GC content and homopolymers, and high fidelity).

## Requirement
* numpy: 1.26.0
* scipy: 1.10.1

## Encoding pipeline
Codewords are generated by in silico random combinations of A, T, G, and C, which results in a library containing 65536 unique 8-nt DNA fragments. 42560 of these fragments meets the requirements of GC content (normally 30%-70%) and homopolymer length (less than 4 nt). 

These fragments are divided into two codebooks, with codebook I contains 37768 codewords for data encoding, and codebook II contains the remaining 9792 codewords for forbidden replacement if needed.

After file segmentation, small files are converted to DNA sequences using direct mapping strategy based on Codebook I.

If forbidden sequences appear during the encoding, they are efficiently detected and replaced using a suffix automaton. For instance, when a DNA sequence “AGTCGAGACA” contains forbidden sequence “TCGA”, a suffix automaton with 14 states is generated. The search starts from state 0, transiting through various states to find out the forbidden sequence position, and replace them according to Codebook II.

The encoding process with sequence optimization contains following main steps.

1. **Binary data reading:** read the binary data from the file.
2. **Data segmentation:** divide binary data into smaller data blocks.
3. **Block encoding:** encode each block using direct mapping strategy, generating 128-nt data sequences.
4. **Sequence optimization:** replace forbidden sequences in the 128-nt data sequences by suffix automation.
5. **Error correction:** add the 17-nt single-base error correction codes to the optimized sequences, resulting in 145-nt sequences.
6. **Address block addition:** add address fragment to each sequence by encoding its sequence number as an 8-nt fragment according to its division order, which results in 153-nt data strands. 
7. **Primer addition:** add 20-nt specific primers to both ends of each sequence, therefore, the file data strands are in length of 193-nt.

## Decoding pipeline
The decoding process is the inverse of the encoding process, which contains the following steps.

1. **Sequencing data assembly:** collect the original sequencing data from NGS and assemble the sequences.
2. **Primer matching and filtering:** match the assembled sequences with specific primers and retain the sequences with complete specific primers.
3. **Sequence segmentation:** split the filtered sequences into address blocks, data blocks, and error correction codes.
4. **Error correction recovery:** correct the data blocks and error correction blocks. The address information of unrecoverable sequences is recorded.
5. **Consistency alignment:** perform consistency alignment on sequences with the same address block that failed for error correction to generate a consensus sequence for secondary error correction recovery.
6. **XOR recovery:** perform XOR recovery for sequences that failed secondary error correction.
7. **Direct mapping decoding:** convert DNA sequences to binary sequences by decoding the successfully error-corrected sequences using the direct mapping table.
8. **File reconstruction based on address order:** concatenate all sequences according to the address block order to generate the final decoded file.

## Files
DNA-SaM supports multiple file types. A file-type encoding table is provided as Table 1, which introduces the records of 38 file types by 4-nt DNA fragments.
#### Table 1. File type encoding table.
| File type | File suffix | DNA |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Text file | .txt、.doc/.docx、.log | ATCG、ATGC、TACG |
| Image file | .jpg/.jpeg、.png、.gif、.bmp、.tiff | TCGA、ACTG、ACGT、AGCT、AGTC |
| Audio files | .mp3、.wav、.aac、.flac、.ogg | TAGC、TCAG、TGAC、TGCA、CATG |
| Video file | .mp4、.avi、.mov、.wmv、.mvkv | ATCA、ATAC、TCGC、ACGC、AGGT |
| Spreadsheet | .xls/.xlsx、.csv | CAGT、CTAG |
| Compress file | .zip、.rar、.7z、.gz | CTGA、CGAT、CGTA、GATC |
| Executable file | .exe、.app | GACT、GTCA |
| Web page file | .html/.htm、.css | GTAC、GCTA |
| Database file | .db、.sql | GATG、GTAG |
| Program source code file | .c/.cpp、.py、.java、.js | CATC、CTAC、ACGA、AGCA |
| Document files | .ppt、.pdf、.md、.epub | TCGT、TGCT、ACAC、CACA |

To validate the favorable performance of DNA-SaM, various files have been encoded by DNA-SaM system, followed by performing standard DNA data storage scheme. The encoded files are provided in Table 2, with recording the file names, file types, addresses, file sizes, primers and the encoded oligo numbers. 

#### Table 2. File encoding details for experimental verification. 
| File name | File permission | File primer (left) | File primer (right) | File random address | File size (Byte) | Oligo number |
|----------|-----------------|--------------------|---------------------|---------------------|------------------|--------------|
| star.mp4 | user | ATTGCCCCTTGGACCCAACG | CTCATCTCCGGCAGCAGTAG | [1009, 488, 12, 720, 929, 365, 771, 586, 871, 577, 605] | 243517 | 9744 |
| chest_x_ray.png | admin | TCGCCCGAAGAAAAGACTCC | TACGAACGCAGGGTGTAAGG | [387, 499, 117, 404, 374, 920, 141, 732, 214, 560, 330] | 266208 | 10651 |
| The_Google_File_System.pdf | admin | GCCACAGATTTCGCGATACC | GGAGTCATGTGGGGCCTTTC | [399, 372, 308, 649, 25, 744, 365, 350, 672, 937, 490] | 275544 | 11024 |
| xiyou_0.txt | admin | CGCAGCGTGTGAGATTCATG | AGCGTGTCTGTGGGTGTATC | [1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0] | 1450736 | 11609 |
| xiyou_1.txt | admin | CGCAGCGTGTGAGATTCATG | AGCGTGTCTGTGGGTGTATC | [1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0] |  | 11609 |
| xiyou_2.txt | admin | CGCAGCGTGTGAGATTCATG | AGCGTGTCTGTGGGTGTATC | [1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0] |  | 11609 |
| xiyou_3.txt | admin | CGCAGCGTGTGAGATTCATG | AGCGTGTCTGTGGGTGTATC | [2, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0] |  | 11609 |
| xiyou_4.txt | admin | CGCAGCGTGTGAGATTCATG | AGCGTGTCTGTGGGTGTATC | [2, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0] |  | 11609 |
| bencao_0.txt | admin | TTCGCCGCCAGAATCAGCAG | ACGGCCTCAACACAGACGAC | [1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0] | 460158 | 9206 |
| bencao_1.txt | admin | TTCGCCGCCAGAATCAGCAG | ACGGCCTCAACACAGACGAC | [1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0] |  | 9206 |
| tiangong.txt | admin | GCCGCGTGACCTTCATCTGT | GTTGCCTTGACGTGGGTGTG | [1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0] | 179581 | 7187 |
| Cottage | admin | GGCCGCTTTCGTCACATAAC | CGAGACCCGCAACTTGACTG | [427, 536, 241, 380, 694, 432, 619, 535, 769, 391, 88] | 278311 | 11136 |
| Coner | admin | GGCCCTATGTCTCAGCACTC | TCGGACAAGTCGCGGAGTTC | [720, 776, 128, 965, 211 341, 121, 412, 410, 294, 719] | 282629 | 11307 |
| Giraffe | admin | GGCTGCTGACCTCCATAACG | GGACAAGCCCGACCCTATAG | [1000, 322, 407, 318, 261, 81, 196, 895, 681, 6, 351] | 282350 | 11297 |
| Three horses-122 | admin | TGAAGATGGAGGGAGCGAAG | CTTCTCAACGTCCGCCCATG | [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 30, 3] | 262144 | 10489 |
| Three horses-339 | admin | TGAAGATGGAGGGAGCGAAG | CTTCTCAACGTCCGCCCATG | [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 85, 1] | 262144 | 10489 |
| Three horse-492 | admin | TGAAGATGGAGGGAGCGAAG | CITCTCAACGTCCGCCCATG | [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 123, 1] | 262144 | 10489 |

_Total size: 4505466 (4.30 MB)  Oligo number: 180270_

## Example of usage
* **encode**  
```
python encode.py -i The_Google_File_System.pdf -o test -c config.json
```
> -i: file for DNA encode  
> -o: output file  
> -c: config file which include primer sequence and other information  

* **decode**  
```
python decode.py -i .\test\result.txt -o out -c config.json -d /your_path/test
```
> -i: decode file include assembled oligo sequences  
> -o: output directory  
> -c: config file which include primer sequence and other information  
> -d: directory of record file and ecc file  

* **decode from fastq file**  
```
python decode_sequences.py -c config.json -o out -f 0.2
```
> -c: config file which include primer sequence, fastq file and other information  
> -o: output directory  
> -f: value of proportion of low quality bases in the sequence  

## Dependencies
All comparative experiments were conducted under a consistent computational environment:\
CPU: Inter® Core ™ i7-10700 CPU @2.90 GHZ \
RAM: 16 GB \
OS: Microsoft X64 system\
Python: 3.11.5.\
Additional in silico experiment was conducted under uniform environment: Windows 10, Intel® Core ™ i7-10700 CPU @2.90 GHZ, RAM, 16 GB, at a Microsoft X64 system; Graphic card AMD Radeon RX 640 (4 GB), Intel® HUDGraphics 630 (128 MB); 8 GB SSD Microsoft Virtual Disk, 1.82 TB HDDST2000DM008-2FR102, 238 GB SSDKBG40ZNS256GNVMe KIOXIA 256 GB. All algorithms were run in the terminal environment of Ubuntu 22.04.5 LTS using python 3.9, with default parameters.

## License
This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the https://github.com/DNA-intelligence/DNA-SaM/blob/main/LICENSE file for details.



